docs(learncss): add Lists guide (#6063)
GoogleChrome/web.dev: src/site/content/en/learn/css/lists/index.md

---
title: Lists
description: >
  A list, structurally, is composed of a list container element, like an `<ol>` or `<ul>`, and filled with list items, (`<li>`). In this module, you'll learn how to style all the parts of a list.
audio:
  title: 'The CSS Podcast - 030: Lists'
  src: 'https://traffic.libsyn.com/secure/thecsspodcast/TCP030_v2.mp3?dest-id=1891556'
  thumbnail: image/foR0vJZKULb5AGJExlazy1xYDgI2/ECDb0qa4TB7yUsHwBic8.png
authors:
  - emmatwersky
date: 2021-08-30
---

Imagine you have a bunch of items you plan to buy during your next grocery trip. One common way to represent this visually is a list—but how can you add styling to your grocery list?

```html
<ul>
  <li>oat milk</li>
  <li>rhubarb</li>
  <li>cereal</li>
  <li>pie crust</li>
</ul>
```

{% Codepen {
  user: 'web-dot-dev',
  id: 'zYzrEOW',
  tab: 'result'
} %}

## Creating a List

> The preceding list started with a semantic element, or `<ul>`, with children groceries list items, or `<li>`'s. If you inspect each `<li>` element you can see that they all have `display: list-item`, which is why the browser renders it with a `::marker` by default.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The preceding list started with a semantic element, or `<ul>`, with grocery list items (`<li>` elements) as children. If you inspect each `<li>` element you can see that they all have `display: list-item`, which is why the browser renders a `::marker` by default.
```

```css
li {
  display: list-item;
}
```

There are two other types of lists. 

> Ordered lists can be created with `<ol>`, in which case the list-items `::marker` be a number by default. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Ordered lists can be created with `<ol>`, in which case the list-item will display a number as the `::marker`. 
```

```html
<ol>
  <li>oat milk</li>
  <li>rhubarb</li>
  <li>cereal</li>
  <li>pie crust</li>
</ol>
```

And description lists are created with `<dl>`, however this list type does not use the `<li>` list item element.

```html
<dl>
  <dt>oat milk</dt>
  <dd>- non dairy trendy drink</dd>
  <dt>cereal</dt>
  <dd>- breakfast food</dd>
</dl>
```

{% Codepen {
  user: 'web-dot-dev',
  id: 'WNOrZNG',
  tab: 'result'
} %}

## List Styles

Now that you know how to make a list, you can style them. The first CSS properties to discover are those that are applied to the entire list.

There are three list-style properties you can use to style your example: `list-style-position`, `list-style-image`, and `list-style-type`.

### `list-style-position`

[`list-style-position`](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/CSS/list-style-position) allows you to move your bullet point to either `inside` or `outside` the list-item's contents. The default `outside` means the bullet point is not included in the list items contents while `inside` moves the first element among the list item's contents.

> {% Img src="image/dQwiPAoChjTYzXYCNg6U6Tsnr3x1/qVlpVCrwKwbGjEJdmqh0.jpg", alt="A list with both outside and inside ::marker which shows that outside (default value) is not in the list-item and inside is inside the list-item content box", width="800", height="270" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/dQwiPAoChjTYzXYCNg6U6Tsnr3x1/qVlpVCrwKwbGjEJdmqh0.jpg", alt="A list with both outside and inside ::marker which shows that outside (default value) is not in the list-item and inside is inside the list-item content box.", width="800", height="270" %}
```

> {% Codepen {

Reviewer: this would be clearer if the list items had a background color.

Author: added!

```css
/* type */
list-style: square;

/* image */
list-style: url('../img/shape.png');

/* position */
list-style: inside;

/* type | position */
list-style: georgian inside;

/* type | image | position */
list-style: lower-roman url('../img/shape.png') outside;

/* Keyword value */
list-style: none;

/* Global values */
list-style: inherit;
list-style: initial;
list-style: revert;
list-style: unset;
```

This is the most commonly used property of the list styles covered in this section. One common application is `list-style: none` to hide default styles. Default styles come from the browser, and you often see reset stylesheets removing list styles like padding and margins. You can also use this shorthand to set styles, like `list-style: square inside;`

{% Codepen {
  user: 'web-dot-dev',
  id: 'eYRJGme',
  tab: 'result'
} %}

So far, the examples have focused on styling an entire list and list items, but what about a more granular approach?

## ::marker pseudo

> The `list-item` marker element is the bullet, hyphen or roman numeral that helps indicate each list-item in your list.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The `list-item` marker element is the bullet, hyphen, or roman numeral that helps indicate each item in your list.
```

> {% Img src="image/dQwiPAoChjTYzXYCNg6U6Tsnr3x1/pOWTl4BYyJI7qgbMVeYu.jpg", alt="A list with three items which shows that each of the bullets are ::marker pseudo elements", width="800", height="395" %}

Reviewer: ```suggestion
{% Img src="image/dQwiPAoChjTYzXYCNg6U6Tsnr3x1/pOWTl4BYyJI7qgbMVeYu.jpg", alt="A list with three items which shows that each of the bullets are ::marker pseudo elements.", width="800", height="395" %}
```

If you inspect the list in DevTools, you can see a `::marker` element for each of the list items, despite not declaring any in HTML. If you inspect the `::marker` further, you'll see the browser default styling for it.

```css
::marker {
    unicode-bidi: isolate;
    font-variant-numeric: tabular-nums;
    text-transform: none;
    text-indent: 0px !important;
    text-align: start !important;
    text-align-last: start !important;
}
```

> When you declare a list, each item is given a marker, despite there being no bullet point or roman numeral in your HTML. This is  a pseudo-element because the browser generates it for you, and provides a limited styling API to target it. [Learn more about the anatomy of the CSS bullet.](https://web.dev/css-marker-pseudo-element/) `::marker` currently has [limited support](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::marker#browser_compatibility) in Safari.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When you declare a list, each item is given a marker, despite there being no bullet point or roman numeral in your HTML. This is  a pseudo-element because the browser generates it for you, and provides a limited styling API to target it. [Learn more about the anatomy of the CSS bullet.](/css-marker-pseudo-element/) `::marker` currently has [limited support](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/::marker#browser_compatibility) in Safari.
```

### Marker Box

In the CSS layout model, list item markers are represented by a marker box associated with each list item. The marker box is the container which typically contains the bullet or number. 

To style the marker box, you can use the `::marker` selector. This allows you to select just the marker instead of styling based on the entire list.

{% Codepen {
  user: 'web-dot-dev',
  id: 'jOwWGPy',
  tab: 'css,result'
} %}

{% Aside %}
Note: ::marker elements precede any pseudo-elements that you may have inserted using CSS `::before`.
{% endAside %}

### Marker Styles

> Now that you have selected the marker, let's look at the styling properties available to this selector. You can learn more about [Custom bullets with CSS ::marker](https://web.dev/css-marker-pseudo-element/) on web.dev.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Now that you have selected the marker, let's look at the styling properties available to this selector. You can learn more about [Custom bullets with CSS ::marker](/css-marker-pseudo-element/) on web.dev.
```

You do this by adding the property `display: list-item`. One example of using `display: list-item` is if you want a hanging bullet on a heading, so that you can change it to something else with `::marker`. The following example shows a heading using `display: list-item` for styling purposes, with a list using correct list markup below.

{% Codepen {
  user: 'web-dot-dev',
  id: 'ExXPwjR',
  tab: 'css,result'
} %}

While you can turn anything into a list-item view with `display`, you should not use this instead of using correct list markup, if the content you are styling really is a list. Changing the visual appearance of an item to a list item does not change how accessibility services read and recognize the item, so it will not be read as a list item to screen readers or switch devices. You should always use semantic markup and create lists with `<li>` whenever possible.

## Resources

- [MDN Guide on Styling Lists](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Styling_text/Styling_lists)

> - [Custom bullets with CSS ::marker](https://web.dev/css-marker-pseudo-element/)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [Custom bullets with CSS ::marker](/css-marker-pseudo-element/)
```

> - [MDN Guide on Styling Lists](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Learn/CSS/Styling_text/Styling_lists)
> - [Custom bullets with CSS ::marker](/css-marker-pseudo-element/)
> - [Smashing Magazine: CSS Lists, Markers and Counters](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2019/07/css-lists-markers-counters/)
> - [MDN Using CSS Counters](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Lists_and_Counters/Using_CSS_counters)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- [MDN Guide on Styling Lists](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Learn/CSS/Styling_text/Styling_lists)
- [Custom bullets with CSS ::marker](/css-marker-pseudo-element/)
- [Smashing Magazine: CSS Lists, Markers and Counters](https://www.smashingmagazine.com/2019/07/css-lists-markers-counters/)
- [MDN Using CSS Counters](https://developer.mozilla.org/docs/Web/CSS/CSS_Lists_and_Counters/Using_CSS_counters)
```
